docs/docs/index.md, before:

# Mathesar Documentation

Mathesar is a web application that makes working with PostgreSQL databases both simple and powerful. It empowers users of all technical skill levels to view, edit, query, and collaborate on data with a familiar spreadsheet-like interface—no code needed. It has native database-level access control, can be deployed in minutes, and works directly with PostgreSQL databases, schemas, and tables without extra abstractions. The project is 100% open source and maintained by Mathesar Foundation, a 501(c)(3) nonprofit.

## Try Mathesar

This is a quick way to play with Mathesar locally, but is not appropriate for saving data that you care about or setting up a long-term installation.

1. With [Docker](https://docs.docker.com/get-docker/) installed, run:

    ```
    docker run -it --name mathesar -p 8000:8000 mathesar/mathesar:latest
    ```

1. Visit [http://localhost:8000/](http://localhost:8000/) to set up an admin user account and create a database connection.

    ??? tip "Tips when trying Mathesar locally"
        - To open a [psql](https://www.postgresql.org/docs/current/app-psql.html) shell within the container, run:
        
            ```
            docker exec -it mathesar sudo -u postgres psql
            ```

        - To stop Mathesar, press <kbd>Ctrl</kbd>+<kbd>C</kbd> in the shell where it is running.

        - To start again, run `docker start mathesar`.

        - To remove the Docker container, run `docker rm mathesar` .

            ⚠️ This will also delete the data that you've saved within Mathesar!

## Install Mathesar

You can self-host Mathesar by following one of the guides below:

- [Install using Docker compose](./administration/install-via-docker-compose.md) — a production setup with separate reverse-proxy and database containers.
- [Install directly on Linux, macOS, or WSL](./administration/install-from-scratch.md) — an advanced setup that doesn't rely on Docker.


## Help out

- [Make a donation](https://mathesar.org/donate) - We're a non-profit organization and your donations help sustain our core team. 
- [Help build Mathesar](https://github.com/mathesar-foundation/mathesar/blob/develop/CONTRIBUTING.md) - As an open source project, we actively encourage contribution!

Commit message:

[WIP] Digital Ocean one-click installation docs

docs/docs/index.md, after:

# Mathesar Documentation

Mathesar is a web application that makes working with PostgreSQL databases both simple and powerful. It empowers users of all technical skill levels to view, edit, query, and collaborate on data with a familiar spreadsheet-like interface—no code needed. It has native database-level access control, can be deployed in minutes, and works directly with PostgreSQL databases, schemas, and tables without extra abstractions. The project is 100% open source and maintained by Mathesar Foundation, a 501(c)(3) nonprofit.

## Try Mathesar

This is a quick way to play with Mathesar locally, but is not appropriate for saving data that you care about or setting up a long-term installation.

1. With [Docker](https://docs.docker.com/get-docker/) installed, run:

    ```
    docker run -it --name mathesar -p 8000:8000 mathesar/mathesar:latest
    ```

1. Visit [http://localhost:8000/](http://localhost:8000/) to set up an admin user account and create a database connection.

    ??? tip "Tips when trying Mathesar locally"
        - To open a [psql](https://www.postgresql.org/docs/current/app-psql.html) shell within the container, run:

            ```
            docker exec -it mathesar sudo -u postgres psql
            ```

        - To stop Mathesar, press <kbd>Ctrl</kbd>+<kbd>C</kbd> in the shell where it is running.

        - To start again, run `docker start mathesar`.

        - To remove the Docker container, run `docker rm mathesar` .

            ⚠️ This will also delete the data that you've saved within Mathesar!

## Install Mathesar

You can self-host Mathesar by following one of the guides below:

### Fully self-hosted

- [Install using Docker compose](./administration/install-via-docker-compose.md) — a production setup with separate reverse-proxy and database containers.
- [Install directly on Linux, macOS, or WSL](./administration/install-from-scratch.md) — an advanced setup that doesn't rely on Docker.

### One-click, managed solutions

- [One-click install to Digital Ocean App Platform](./administration/install-one-click-digital-ocean.md) — Quick and simple management of Mathesar costing as little as $12/month.

## Help out

- [Make a donation](https://mathesar.org/donate) - We're a non-profit organization and your donations help sustain our core team.
- [Help build Mathesar](https://github.com/mathesar-foundation/mathesar/blob/develop/CONTRIBUTING.md) - As an open source project, we actively encourage contribution!
