# Mathesar 0.2.5

???+ note "Help shape the future of Mathesar"
    We're looking to speak with users to better understand how Mathesar can help you or your team. It's only a 20 minute interview, and we're happy to offer a $25 gift card in return.

    If you're interested in helping, you can use [this link](https://cal.com/mathesar/users) to schedule a chat with Zack on the Mathesar team. Thank you!

## Summary

This is a minor hotfix release that fixes a single regression introduced by Mathesar [0.2.4](./0.2.4.md). Access to the Data Explorer has been restored for Postgres databases that are connected via TCP/IP.

_We are working hard on several user-facing improvements. These are planned to launch in June 2025 as part of Mathesar 0.3.0._

!!! info ""
	This page provides a comprehensive list of all changes in the release.

## Bug fixes

### Data explorer access restored for all connections

Mathesar [0.2.4](./0.2.4.md) introduced a bug where the Data Explorer was showing an error unless the underlying Postgres database was configured to connect via Unix socket. This change restores full Data Explorer functionality, regardless of database connection type.

[#4492](https://github.com/mathesar-foundation/mathesar/pull/4492 "Move hostname = None into socket conditional")

## Upgrading to 0.2.5  {:#upgrading}

### For installations using Docker Compose

If you have a Docker compose installation (including one from the guided script), run the command below:

```
docker compose -f /etc/mathesar/docker-compose.yml up --pull always -d
```

!!! warning "Your installation directory may be different"
    You may need to change `/etc/mathesar/` in the command above if you chose to install Mathesar to a different directory.

### For installations done from scratch

If you installed Mathesar [from scratch](../administration/install-from-scratch.md), then use these steps to upgrade your installation to 0.2.5.

1. Go to your Mathesar installation directory

    ```
    cd xMATHESAR_INSTALLATION_DIRx
    ```

    !!! note
        Your installation directory may be different from above if you used a different directory when installing Mathesar.

1. Pull version 0.2.5 from the repository

    ```
    git pull https://github.com/mathesar-foundation/mathesar.git
    git checkout 0.2.5
    ```

1. Update Python dependencies

    ```
    pip install -r requirements.txt
    ```

1. Activate our virtual environment

    ```
    source ./mathesar-venv/bin/activate
    ```

2. Run Django migrations

    ```
    python manage.py migrate
    ```

3. Download and extract frontend assets

    ```
    wget https://github.com/mathesar-foundation/mathesar/releases/download/0.2.5/static_files.zip
    unzip static_files.zip && mv static_files mathesar/static/mathesar && rm static_files.zip
    ```

4. Compile Mathesar translation files

    ```
    python manage.py compilemessages
    ```

5. Update Mathesar functions on the database:

    ```
    python -m mathesar.install --skip-confirm | tee /tmp/install.py.log
    ```

6. Restart the gunicorn server

    ```
    systemctl restart gunicorn
    ```
