mathesar_ui/STANDARDS.md, before:

# Front end code standards

## General

### Naming conventions

- File names for Components, Classes and Stylesheets should be in PascalCase. Examples:

  ```txt
  App.svelte
  CancellablePromise.ts
  App.scss
  ```

- Typescript file names should be in lowerCamelCase. Examples:

  ```txt
  index.ts
  utilityFunctions.ts
  ```

- All variables and constants should be in lowerCamelCase. Examples:

  ```javascript
  export let randomVariable;
  let aNewVariable = 'new variable';
  const someValue = 'constant value';
  ```

- All function names should be in lowerCamelCase. Examples:

  ```javascript
  function someFunction() {
    /* ... */
  }
  let someOtherFn = () => {
    /* ... */
  };
  const someConstFn = () => {
    /* ... */
  };
  ```

- All CSS class names should be in kebab-case. Examples:

  ```html
  <div class="cell-fabric"></div>
  <span class="editable-cell"></span>
  ```

- All directory names should be in kebab-case (hyphen-delimited). Examples:

  ```txt
  /components/text-input/
  /components/combo-boxes/multi-select/
  ```

- Acronyms within PascalCase and camelCase should be treated as words. Examples:

  ```txt
  UrlInput.svelte
  ```

  ```ts
  function getApiUrl() {
    /* ... */
  }
  let currentDbName;
  ```

  - [discussion](https://github.com/centerofci/mathesar/discussions/908)
  - Not all code conforms to this standard yet, and bringing existing code into conformance is a low priority.

- Use American English spelling instead of British English spelling. Examples:

  ```txt
  LabeledInput.svelte
  ColorSelector.svelte
  ```

  - [discussion](https://github.com/centerofci/mathesar/discussions/891)

- If a TypeScript file contains _only_ type definitions (without any values or implementation), then use the file extension `.d.ts` instead of `.ts`. If you use `enum` or `const` you'll need make the file a `.ts` file. If you only use `type` and `interface`, then make the file a `.d.ts` file.

- Prefer the term "delete" in code and UI over similar terms like "remove" and "drop".

  - [discussion](https://github.com/centerofci/mathesar/discussions/872)

## HTML

### Build components for valid DOM nesting

When working inside a component that _might_ be placed where [phrasing content](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/Guide/HTML/Content_categories#phrasing_content) is required, be sure to only use phrasing content elements (like `span`) instead of _not_-phrasing content elements (like `div`).

- ✅ Good

  `FancyCheckbox.svelte`

  ```ts
  <span class="make-it-fancy">
    <input type="checkbox" />
  </span>
  ```

- ❌ Bad because it uses `div` instead of `span`

  `FancyCheckbox.svelte`

  ```ts
  <div class="make-it-fancy">
    <input type="checkbox" />
  </div>
  ```

Rationale:

- For example, let's build on the "Bad" example above and write the following Svelte code:

  ```svelte
  <label>
    <FancyCheckbox />
    Foo
  </label>
  ```

  That Svelte code will render:

  ```html
  <label>
    <div class="make-it-fancy">
      <input type="checkbox" />
    </div>
    Foo
  </label>
  ```

  That markup has invalid DOM nesting because a `label` element can only contain phrasing content -- but a `div` is _not_ phrasing content.

Tips:

- You can make a `span` _act_ like a `div` by setting `display: block` if needed.

Notes:

- Not all of our components adhere to this guideline yet.

## CSS

### CSS units

- Don't use `px` — use `rem` or `em` instead.

  Exceptional cases where `px` is okay:

  - when setting the root `font-size`

Note: some of our older code still does not conform to this standard.

### Component spacing and layout

To preserve modularity and encapsulation, components should not define their own layout-related behavior — instead the consuming component should be responsible for layout and spacing. Components should not set any space around their outer-most visual edges or define their own z-index.

- **margin**: The component's root element should not set any margin.
- **padding**: If the component's root element has border, it's fine to set padding because the border will serve as the outer-most visual edge. But if there's no border, then there should be no padding.
- **z-index**:

  - The component's root element should not set any z-index.
  - It's fine for child elements _within the component_ to set a z-index, but in such cases the component's root element must establish its own [stacking context](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/CSS_Positioning/Understanding_z_index/The_stacking_context). It's best to use `isolation: isolate;` to establish the stacking context because it clearly communicates intent and works without setting z-index. Once your component has its own stacking context, then you're free to set the z-index values within the component without thinking about anything outside the component. You can use simple values like `1` and `2` within the component because everything is encapsulated.
  - If you want to render a child component with a specific z-index, then prefer to nest the child component inside a DOM element, setting the z-index on the DOM element (not the component).
  - If you absolutely must pass a z-index value _into_ a component, then do so using CSS variables as follows:

    1. Within the parent component (that establishes a stacking context), define one CSS variable for each "layer" within that stacking context.
    1. Follow this naming convention to scope your CSS variables:

       ```css
       .record-selector-window {
         --z-index__record_selector__row-header: 1;
         --z-index__record_selector__thead: 2;
         --z-index__record_selector__thead-row-header: 3;
         --z-index__record_selector__shadow-inset: 4;
         --z-index__record_selector__overlay: 5;
         --z-index__record_selector__above-overlay: 6;
       }
       ```

       Here, the name of each variable begins with `z-index`, then has a name to represent the stacking context (in this case `record-selector`), then has a name to represent the layer within that stacking context (e.g. `row-header`). Double underscores delimit those three pieces of the variable.

## JavaScript

### `await` vs `.then`

Prefer `await` over `.then` when possible.

- ✅ Good

  ```ts
  async function handleSave() {
    isLoading = true;
    try {
      await save(value);
    } catch (e: unknown) {
      error = getErrorMessage(e);
    } finally {
      isLoading = false;
    }
  }
  ```

- ❌ Bad

  ```ts
  function handleSave() {
    isLoading = true;
    save(value)
      .then(() => {
        isLoading = false;
        return true;
      })
      .catch((e: unknown) => {
        error = getErrorMessage(e);
        isLoading = false;
      });
  }
  ```

### `function` vs `const`

Prefer `function` over `const`

- ✅ Good

  ```ts
  function withFoo(s: string) {
    return `${s} foo`;
  }
  ```

- ❌ Bad

  ```ts
  const withFoo = (s: string) => {
    return `${s} foo`;
  };
  ```

Rationale:

- The `function` syntax is more concise, with less likelihood of line wrapping.

- With TypeScript, adding explicit return type annotations becomes significantly more verbose when using the `const` approach. For example,

  ```ts
  export const withFoo: (s: string) => string = (s: string) => {
    return `${s} foo`;
  };
  ```

  We don't require explicit return types everywhere, but we do use the [explicit-module-boundary-types](https://github.com/typescript-eslint/typescript-eslint/blob/v4.33.0/packages/eslint-plugin/docs/rules/explicit-module-boundary-types.md) linting rule to require them for _exported_ functions. This makes TS errors appear closer to the code that should be fixed and also provides some small performance gains with `tsc`.

## TypeScript

### `type` vs `interface`

- Prefer `interface` when possible.
- Use `type` when necessary.

### `null` vs `undefined`

Prefer using `undefined` over `null` where possible.

- ✅ Good

  ```ts
  const name = writable<string | undefined>(undefined);
  ```

- ❌ Bad because it uses `null` when it could use `undefined`

  ```ts
  const name = writable<string | null>(null);
  ```

- ❌ Bad because it uses an empty string to represent an empty value when it probably should be using `undefined` for greater code clarity.

  ```ts
  const name = writable<string>('');
  ```

- ❌ Bad because it mixes `null` and `undefined` into the same type.

  ```ts
  const name = writable<string | undefined | null>(null);
  ```

- ✅ Acceptable use of `null` because it's necessary for data that will be serialized to JSON. (Using `undefined` here would result in that key/value pair being removed from the JSON string).

  ```ts
  await patchApi(url, { name: null });
  ```

- ✅ Acceptable use of `null` because the `Checkbox` component is designed to accept a `null` value to place the checkbox into an indeterminate state.

  ```svelte
  <Checkbox value={null} />
  ```

Considerations:

- In some cases you may need to coalesce a `null` value to `undefined`. For example:

  ```ts
  function firstCapitalLetter(s: string): string | undefined {
    return s.match(/[A-Z]/)?.[0] ?? undefined;
  }
  ```

Additional context:

- [discussion](https://github.com/centerofci/mathesar/discussions/825)

### API type definitions

TypeScript types (including interfaces) which describe API requests and responses (and properties therein) should be separated from other front end code and placed in the `mathesar_ui/src/api` directory. This structure serves to communicate that, unlike other TypeScript types, the front end does not have control over the API types.

[Discussion](https://github.com/centerofci/mathesar/discussions/875)

## Svelte

### Minimize Svelte store instances

- ✅ Good because only one `cost` store is created.

  ```ts
  function getCost(toppings: Readable<string[]>) {
    return derived(this.toppings, (t) => 10 + t.length * 2);
  }

  class PizzaOrder {
    toppings: string[];
    cost: Readable<number>;

    constructor() {
      this.toppings = [];
      this.cost = getCost(this.toppings);
    }
  }
  ```

- ❌ Bad because separate calls to `cost` will create separate stores which may lead to more subscribe and unsubscribe events in some cases, risking performance problems.

  ```ts
  class PizzaOrder {
    toppings: string[];

    constructor() {
      this.toppings = [];
    }

    get cost(): Readable<boolean> {
      return derived(this.toppings, (t) => 10 + t.length * 2);
    }
  }
  ```

Additional context:

- [Discussion](https://github.com/centerofci/mathesar/pull/776#issuecomment-963831424)

### When using `{...$$restProps}`, define a `$$Props` type

- Example:

  - `Child.svelte`

    ```svelte
    <script lang="ts>
      export let word: string;
    </script>

    <span class="child">{word}</span>
    ```

    `Child` explicitly accepts a `word` prop.

  - `Parent.svelte`

    ```svelte
    <script lang="ts>
      import type { ComponentProps } from 'svelte';

      import Child from './Child.svelte`;

      type $$Props = ComponentProps<MessageBox>;
    </script>

    <Child {...$$restProps} />
    ```

    TypeScript knows that `Parent` accepts a `word` prop too because we have defined `$$Props` as such.

  - `Grandparent.svelte`

    ```svelte
    <script lang="ts>
      import Parent from './Parent.svelte`;
    </script>

    <Parent word="foo" />
    ```

    Passing `"foo"` to the `word` prop here is type-safe.

- If you want to alter the props, you can define `$$Props` like this:

  ```ts
  interface $$Props extends Omit<ComponentProps<Child>, 'notThatOne'> {
    addThisOne: string;
  }
  ```

  You can search our codebase for `$$Props` to see the various ways we're using it.

Commit message:

Document code standard for viewport units

mathesar_ui/STANDARDS.md, after:

# Front end code standards

## General

### Naming conventions

- File names for Components, Classes and Stylesheets should be in PascalCase. Examples:

  ```txt
  App.svelte
  CancellablePromise.ts
  App.scss
  ```

- Typescript file names should be in lowerCamelCase. Examples:

  ```txt
  index.ts
  utilityFunctions.ts
  ```

- All variables and constants should be in lowerCamelCase. Examples:

  ```javascript
  export let randomVariable;
  let aNewVariable = 'new variable';
  const someValue = 'constant value';
  ```

- All function names should be in lowerCamelCase. Examples:

  ```javascript
  function someFunction() {
    /* ... */
  }
  let someOtherFn = () => {
    /* ... */
  };
  const someConstFn = () => {
    /* ... */
  };
  ```

- All CSS class names should be in kebab-case. Examples:

  ```html
  <div class="cell-fabric"></div>
  <span class="editable-cell"></span>
  ```

- All directory names should be in kebab-case (hyphen-delimited). Examples:

  ```txt
  /components/text-input/
  /components/combo-boxes/multi-select/
  ```

- Acronyms within PascalCase and camelCase should be treated as words. Examples:

  ```txt
  UrlInput.svelte
  ```

  ```ts
  function getApiUrl() {
    /* ... */
  }
  let currentDbName;
  ```

  - [discussion](https://github.com/centerofci/mathesar/discussions/908)
  - Not all code conforms to this standard yet, and bringing existing code into conformance is a low priority.

- Use American English spelling instead of British English spelling. Examples:

  ```txt
  LabeledInput.svelte
  ColorSelector.svelte
  ```

  - [discussion](https://github.com/centerofci/mathesar/discussions/891)

- If a TypeScript file contains _only_ type definitions (without any values or implementation), then use the file extension `.d.ts` instead of `.ts`. If you use `enum` or `const` you'll need make the file a `.ts` file. If you only use `type` and `interface`, then make the file a `.d.ts` file.

- Prefer the term "delete" in code and UI over similar terms like "remove" and "drop".

  - [discussion](https://github.com/centerofci/mathesar/discussions/872)

## HTML

### Build components for valid DOM nesting

When working inside a component that _might_ be placed where [phrasing content](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/Guide/HTML/Content_categories#phrasing_content) is required, be sure to only use phrasing content elements (like `span`) instead of _not_-phrasing content elements (like `div`).

- ✅ Good

  `FancyCheckbox.svelte`

  ```ts
  <span class="make-it-fancy">
    <input type="checkbox" />
  </span>
  ```

- ❌ Bad because it uses `div` instead of `span`

  `FancyCheckbox.svelte`

  ```ts
  <div class="make-it-fancy">
    <input type="checkbox" />
  </div>
  ```

Rationale:

- For example, let's build on the "Bad" example above and write the following Svelte code:

  ```svelte
  <label>
    <FancyCheckbox />
    Foo
  </label>
  ```

  That Svelte code will render:

  ```html
  <label>
    <div class="make-it-fancy">
      <input type="checkbox" />
    </div>
    Foo
  </label>
  ```

  That markup has invalid DOM nesting because a `label` element can only contain phrasing content -- but a `div` is _not_ phrasing content.

Tips:

- You can make a `span` _act_ like a `div` by setting `display: block` if needed.

Notes:

- Not all of our components adhere to this guideline yet.

## CSS

### Pixel units

- Don't use `px` — use `rem` or `em` instead.

  Exceptional cases where `px` is okay:

  - when setting the root `font-size`

Note: some of our older code still does not conform to this standard.

### Viewport units

- Don't use `vh` or `vw` — use `svh` and `svw` instead. See [#4752](https://github.com/mathesar-foundation/mathesar/issues/4752) to understand why.

### Component spacing and layout

To preserve modularity and encapsulation, components should not define their own layout-related behavior — instead the consuming component should be responsible for layout and spacing. Components should not set any space around their outer-most visual edges or define their own z-index.

- **margin**: The component's root element should not set any margin.
- **padding**: If the component's root element has border, it's fine to set padding because the border will serve as the outer-most visual edge. But if there's no border, then there should be no padding.
- **z-index**:

  - The component's root element should not set any z-index.
  - It's fine for child elements _within the component_ to set a z-index, but in such cases the component's root element must establish its own [stacking context](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/CSS_Positioning/Understanding_z_index/The_stacking_context). It's best to use `isolation: isolate;` to establish the stacking context because it clearly communicates intent and works without setting z-index. Once your component has its own stacking context, then you're free to set the z-index values within the component without thinking about anything outside the component. You can use simple values like `1` and `2` within the component because everything is encapsulated.
  - If you want to render a child component with a specific z-index, then prefer to nest the child component inside a DOM element, setting the z-index on the DOM element (not the component).
  - If you absolutely must pass a z-index value _into_ a component, then do so using CSS variables as follows:

    1. Within the parent component (that establishes a stacking context), define one CSS variable for each "layer" within that stacking context.
    1. Follow this naming convention to scope your CSS variables:

       ```css
       .record-selector-window {
         --z-index__record_selector__row-header: 1;
         --z-index__record_selector__thead: 2;
         --z-index__record_selector__thead-row-header: 3;
         --z-index__record_selector__shadow-inset: 4;
         --z-index__record_selector__overlay: 5;
         --z-index__record_selector__above-overlay: 6;
       }
       ```

       Here, the name of each variable begins with `z-index`, then has a name to represent the stacking context (in this case `record-selector`), then has a name to represent the layer within that stacking context (e.g. `row-header`). Double underscores delimit those three pieces of the variable.

## JavaScript

### `await` vs `.then`

Prefer `await` over `.then` when possible.

- ✅ Good

  ```ts
  async function handleSave() {
    isLoading = true;
    try {
      await save(value);
    } catch (e: unknown) {
      error = getErrorMessage(e);
    } finally {
      isLoading = false;
    }
  }
  ```

- ❌ Bad

  ```ts
  function handleSave() {
    isLoading = true;
    save(value)
      .then(() => {
        isLoading = false;
        return true;
      })
      .catch((e: unknown) => {
        error = getErrorMessage(e);
        isLoading = false;
      });
  }
  ```

### `function` vs `const`

Prefer `function` over `const`

- ✅ Good

  ```ts
  function withFoo(s: string) {
    return `${s} foo`;
  }
  ```

- ❌ Bad

  ```ts
  const withFoo = (s: string) => {
    return `${s} foo`;
  };
  ```

Rationale:

- The `function` syntax is more concise, with less likelihood of line wrapping.

- With TypeScript, adding explicit return type annotations becomes significantly more verbose when using the `const` approach. For example,

  ```ts
  export const withFoo: (s: string) => string = (s: string) => {
    return `${s} foo`;
  };
  ```

  We don't require explicit return types everywhere, but we do use the [explicit-module-boundary-types](https://github.com/typescript-eslint/typescript-eslint/blob/v4.33.0/packages/eslint-plugin/docs/rules/explicit-module-boundary-types.md) linting rule to require them for _exported_ functions. This makes TS errors appear closer to the code that should be fixed and also provides some small performance gains with `tsc`.

## TypeScript

### `type` vs `interface`

- Prefer `interface` when possible.
- Use `type` when necessary.

### `null` vs `undefined`

Prefer using `undefined` over `null` where possible.

- ✅ Good

  ```ts
  const name = writable<string | undefined>(undefined);
  ```

- ❌ Bad because it uses `null` when it could use `undefined`

  ```ts
  const name = writable<string | null>(null);
  ```

- ❌ Bad because it uses an empty string to represent an empty value when it probably should be using `undefined` for greater code clarity.

  ```ts
  const name = writable<string>('');
  ```

- ❌ Bad because it mixes `null` and `undefined` into the same type.

  ```ts
  const name = writable<string | undefined | null>(null);
  ```

- ✅ Acceptable use of `null` because it's necessary for data that will be serialized to JSON. (Using `undefined` here would result in that key/value pair being removed from the JSON string).

  ```ts
  await patchApi(url, { name: null });
  ```

- ✅ Acceptable use of `null` because the `Checkbox` component is designed to accept a `null` value to place the checkbox into an indeterminate state.

  ```svelte
  <Checkbox value={null} />
  ```

Considerations:

- In some cases you may need to coalesce a `null` value to `undefined`. For example:

  ```ts
  function firstCapitalLetter(s: string): string | undefined {
    return s.match(/[A-Z]/)?.[0] ?? undefined;
  }
  ```

Additional context:

- [discussion](https://github.com/centerofci/mathesar/discussions/825)

### API type definitions

TypeScript types (including interfaces) which describe API requests and responses (and properties therein) should be separated from other front end code and placed in the `mathesar_ui/src/api` directory. This structure serves to communicate that, unlike other TypeScript types, the front end does not have control over the API types.

[Discussion](https://github.com/centerofci/mathesar/discussions/875)

## Svelte

### Minimize Svelte store instances

- ✅ Good because only one `cost` store is created.

  ```ts
  function getCost(toppings: Readable<string[]>) {
    return derived(this.toppings, (t) => 10 + t.length * 2);
  }

  class PizzaOrder {
    toppings: string[];
    cost: Readable<number>;

    constructor() {
      this.toppings = [];
      this.cost = getCost(this.toppings);
    }
  }
  ```

- ❌ Bad because separate calls to `cost` will create separate stores which may lead to more subscribe and unsubscribe events in some cases, risking performance problems.

  ```ts
  class PizzaOrder {
    toppings: string[];

    constructor() {
      this.toppings = [];
    }

    get cost(): Readable<boolean> {
      return derived(this.toppings, (t) => 10 + t.length * 2);
    }
  }
  ```

Additional context:

- [Discussion](https://github.com/centerofci/mathesar/pull/776#issuecomment-963831424)

### When using `{...$$restProps}`, define a `$$Props` type

- Example:

  - `Child.svelte`

    ```svelte
    <script lang="ts>
      export let word: string;
    </script>

    <span class="child">{word}</span>
    ```

    `Child` explicitly accepts a `word` prop.

  - `Parent.svelte`

    ```svelte
    <script lang="ts>
      import type { ComponentProps } from 'svelte';

      import Child from './Child.svelte`;

      type $$Props = ComponentProps<MessageBox>;
    </script>

    <Child {...$$restProps} />
    ```

    TypeScript knows that `Parent` accepts a `word` prop too because we have defined `$$Props` as such.

  - `Grandparent.svelte`

    ```svelte
    <script lang="ts>
      import Parent from './Parent.svelte`;
    </script>

    <Parent word="foo" />
    ```

    Passing `"foo"` to the `word` prop here is type-safe.

- If you want to alter the props, you can define `$$Props` like this:

  ```ts
  interface $$Props extends Omit<ComponentProps<Child>, 'notThatOne'> {
    addThisOne: string;
  }
  ```

  You can search our codebase for `$$Props` to see the various ways we're using it.
