mathesar_ui/src/stores/table-data/records.ts.README.md, before:

# Developer notes for `records.ts`

We have some confusing **mess** in `records.ts` that badly needs refactoring!

This file is Sean's attempt at documenting the mess so that future devs (including me) can either work within the mess or refactor it!

## Relevance

This file was created in 2025-02.

Check git blame to see when this file was last updated. Consider that content here may well be stale if the referenced code has changed!

## Row ids

Our `Row` type unfortunately doesn't have a defacto field to uniquely identifies rows. Instead, we seem to have a proliferation of _different_ (and incompatible) identifiers used variously in different contexts. Here is a summary:

- `rowIndex`
    - Type: number
    - Persistence: **stored** in `RecordRow`
    - Origin: generated sequentially within `preprocessRecords`
    - Used
        - to display the number in the row header cell (though it's not _exactly_ the number that eventually gets displayed)
        - in `identifier`
    - Notes:
        - The placeholder row gets a stored rowIndex even though it doesn't display it right away. This is because the placeholder row gets converted to a real row when the user enters data into it, and at that point it needs to display the number in the row header cell.

- `identifier`
    - Type: string
    - Persistence: **stored** in `Row`
    - Origin: generated via `generateRowIdentifier`
        - `__${offset}_${type}_${rowIndex}`
        - `offset` comes from pagination
        - `type` is the type of row: 'groupHeader' | 'normal' | 'dummy' | 'new'
    - Used:
        - In `selectionId` (always)
        - In `rowKey` (sometimes)
        - To compare two rows when making incremental store updates

-  `rowSelectionId` aka `selectionId` aka `rowId`
    - Type: string
    - Persistence: **computed** on the fly
    - Origin: generated via `getRowSelectionId`
        - returns `identifier`
    - Used:
        - as keys in `RecordsData.selectableRowsMap`
        - to form `cellId` values via `makeCellId`
        - when deleting selected rows

- `recordId` aka `recordPk`
    - Type: ResultValue
    - Persistence: **computed** on the fly
    - Origin:
        - adhoc inline logic in multiple places
        - generated via `getPkValueInRecord` (which might throw)
    - Used:
        - in _lots_ of places!

- `rowKey`
    - Type: string
    - Persistence: **computed** on the fly
    - Origin: generated via `getRowKey`
        - this returns `identifier` or stringified `recordId`
    - Used:
        - as keys in `Meta.rowStatus`,
        - as keys in `Meta.rowCreationStatus`
        - as keys in `Meta.rowDeletionStatus`
        - as keys in `Meta.rowsWithClientSideErrors`
        - in some places that actually expect a PK (ugh!) (e.g. `recordPk={rowKey}`)
        - within `getCellKey`

- `itemKey` aka `iterationKey`
    - Type: string
    - Persistence: **computed** on the fly
    - Origin: generated via `getIterationKey` in (`Body.svelte`)
        - this returns `rowKey` or `__index_${index}`
    - Used:
        - as the key to distinguish rows within the VirtualList

## Cell ids

Likewise, _cells_ also need id, but we have two different kinds! Don't get them mixed up!!

- `key` aka `cellKey`
    - Type: string
    - Persistence: **computed** on the fly
    - **Uses `rowKey` values**
    - Origin: generated via `getCellKey`
        - `${String(rowKey)}${CELL_KEY_SEPARATOR}${columnId}`
    - Used in:
        - `Meta.cellModificationStatus`, `modificationStatusMap`
        - `RecordsData.updatePromises`

- `cellId` aka `cellSelectionId`
    - Type: string
    - Persistence: **computed** on the fly
    - **Uses `rowSelectionId` values**
    - Origin: generated via `makeCellId`
        - `JSON.stringify([rowId, columnId]);`
    - Used in:
        - `SheetSelection` (to track which cells are selected)
        - DOM `data-cell-selection-id` attribute in order to construct cell selections

Commit message:

Improve unique id generation, update records readme file with refactor details

mathesar_ui/src/stores/table-data/records.ts.README.md, after:

# Developer notes for `records.ts`

We have some confusing **mess** in `records.ts` that badly needs refactoring!

## 2025-03-13 from Pavish
- `Row` is now a discriminated union of different classes. Refer `Row.ts`.
- `identifier` is used as the defacto field to uniquely identify rows.
    - It is now generated via `getGloballyUniqueId`.
- `rowIndex` is moved to `display.ts` as `rowNumber`.
    - A `DisplayRowDescriptor` is used to wrap Rows and only the record rows that need to display the rowNumber contain this property.
- `rowKey` is removed and no longer used.
    - `identifier` replaces `rowKey`.
    - The type `RowKey` is still present and refers to the `identifier`.

## 2025-02
This file is Sean's attempt at documenting the mess so that future devs (including me) can either work within the mess or refactor it!

Check git blame to see when this file was last updated. Consider that content here may well be stale if the referenced code has changed!

## Row ids

Our `Row` type unfortunately doesn't have a defacto field to uniquely identifies rows. Instead, we seem to have a proliferation of _different_ (and incompatible) identifiers used variously in different contexts. Here is a summary:

- `rowIndex`
    - Type: number
    - Persistence: **stored** in `RecordRow`
    - Origin: generated sequentially within `preprocessRecords`
    - Used
        - to display the number in the row header cell (though it's not _exactly_ the number that eventually gets displayed)
        - in `identifier`
    - Notes:
        - The placeholder row gets a stored rowIndex even though it doesn't display it right away. This is because the placeholder row gets converted to a real row when the user enters data into it, and at that point it needs to display the number in the row header cell.

- `identifier`
    - Type: string
    - Persistence: **stored** in `Row`
    - Origin: generated via `generateRowIdentifier`
        - `__${offset}_${type}_${rowIndex}`
        - `offset` comes from pagination
        - `type` is the type of row: 'groupHeader' | 'normal' | 'dummy' | 'new'
    - Used:
        - In `selectionId` (always)
        - In `rowKey` (sometimes)
        - To compare two rows when making incremental store updates

-  `rowSelectionId` aka `selectionId` aka `rowId`
    - Type: string
    - Persistence: **computed** on the fly
    - Origin: generated via `getRowSelectionId`
        - returns `identifier`
    - Used:
        - as keys in `RecordsData.selectableRowsMap`
        - to form `cellId` values via `makeCellId`
        - when deleting selected rows

- `recordId` aka `recordPk`
    - Type: ResultValue
    - Persistence: **computed** on the fly
    - Origin:
        - adhoc inline logic in multiple places
        - generated via `getPkValueInRecord` (which might throw)
    - Used:
        - in _lots_ of places!

- `rowKey`
    - Type: string
    - Persistence: **computed** on the fly
    - Origin: generated via `getRowKey`
        - this returns `identifier` or stringified `recordId`
    - Used:
        - as keys in `Meta.rowStatus`,
        - as keys in `Meta.rowCreationStatus`
        - as keys in `Meta.rowDeletionStatus`
        - as keys in `Meta.rowsWithClientSideErrors`
        - in some places that actually expect a PK (ugh!) (e.g. `recordPk={rowKey}`)
        - within `getCellKey`

- `itemKey` aka `iterationKey`
    - Type: string
    - Persistence: **computed** on the fly
    - Origin: generated via `getIterationKey` in (`Body.svelte`)
        - this returns `rowKey` or `__index_${index}`
    - Used:
        - as the key to distinguish rows within the VirtualList

## Cell ids

Likewise, _cells_ also need id, but we have two different kinds! Don't get them mixed up!!

- `key` aka `cellKey`
    - Type: string
    - Persistence: **computed** on the fly
    - **Uses `rowKey` values**
    - Origin: generated via `getCellKey`
        - `${String(rowKey)}${CELL_KEY_SEPARATOR}${columnId}`
    - Used in:
        - `Meta.cellModificationStatus`, `modificationStatusMap`
        - `RecordsData.updatePromises`

- `cellId` aka `cellSelectionId`
    - Type: string
    - Persistence: **computed** on the fly
    - **Uses `rowSelectionId` values**
    - Origin: generated via `makeCellId`
        - `JSON.stringify([rowId, columnId]);`
    - Used in:
        - `SheetSelection` (to track which cells are selected)
        - DOM `data-cell-selection-id` attribute in order to construct cell selections
